.TH CHIBI-SCHEME 1 "2020-08-08" "0.9 (fluorine)" "General Commands Manual"
.SH NAME
chibi-scheme \- a tiny Scheme interpreter

.SH SYNOPSIS
.SY chibi-scheme
.RI [ options ]
[--]
.RI [ script " " argument " ...]"
.YS

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B chibi-scheme
is a sample interactive Scheme interpreter for the
.I chibi-scheme
library.
It serves as an example of how to embed
.I chibi-scheme
in applications,
and can be useful on its own for writing scripts and interactive development.

When
.I script
is given, it will be loaded with SRFI-22 semantics, calling the procedure
.I main
(if defined)
with a single parameter as a list of the command-line arguments,
beginning with the script name.
This works as expected with shell #! semantics.

Otherwise, if no script given and no
.B -e
or
.B -p
options are present,
an interactive REPL is entered, reading, evaluating, and then printing expressions
until EOF is reached.
The provided REPL is very minimal.
For a more sophisticated REPL with readline support, signal handling,
module management and smarter read/write
you may want to use the (chibi repl) module.
It can be launched automatically with
.BR "chibi-scheme -R" .

For convenience the default language is the (scheme small) module
which includes every library in the R7RS small standard, and some other dependencies.
All of this together is actually quite large,
so for a more minimal startup language you'll want to use the
.BI -x module
option described below.
The get mostly R5RS-compatible language, use
.B chibi-scheme -xscheme.r5rs\fR,
or to get just the core language used for bootstrapping, use
.B chibi-scheme -xchibi
(or its shortcut
.BR "chibi-scheme -q" ).

.SH OPTIONS
Space is optional between options and their arguments.
Options without arguments
.I may not
be chained together.

To reduce the need for shell escapes,
options with module arguments
.RB ( -m ", " -x " and " -R )
are written in dot notation.
That is, spell module name (\fIfoo bar\fR) as \fIfoo.bar\fR on the command line.

.TP
.B -V
Print the version information and exit immediately.

.TP
.B -q
"Quick" load, a shortcut for
.B chibi-scheme -xchibi\fR.
This is slightly different from (scheme base)
-- which may load faster --
and is guaranteed to not load any additional shared libraries.

.TP
.B -Q
"Extra quick" load, a shortcut for
.B chibi-scheme -xchibi.primitive\fR.
The resulting environment will only contain the core syntactic forms
and primitives coded in C.
This is very fast and is guaranteed to not load any external files,
but is also very limited.

.TP
.BI -r \fR[\fImain\fR]
Run the "main" procedure when the script finishes loading as in SRFI-22.

.TP
.BI -R \fR[\fImodule\fR]
Load the given module and run the "main" procedure it defines
(which need not be exported)
with a single argument of the list of command-line arguments as in SRFI-22.
The name "main" can be overridden with the
.B -r
option.
.I module
may be omitted, in which case it defaults to "chibi.repl".
Thus
.B chibi-scheme -R
is the recommended way to get an advanced REPL.

.TP
.B -s
Strict mode, treating warnings as fatal errors.

.TP
.B -f
Enable case-folding of symbols by the reader as in R5RS.

.TP
.B -T
Disable tail-call optimization.
This can be useful for debugging in some cases,
but also makes it very easy to overflow the stack.

.TP
.BI -h size\fR[/\fImax_size\fR]
Specify the initial size of the heap in bytes,
optionally followed by the maximum size the heap can grow up to.
.I size
can be any integer value, optionally suffixed with
"K" for kilobytes,
"M" for megabytes,
or "G" for gigabytes (all powers of 1024).
.B -h
must be specified before any options which load or evaluate Scheme code.

.TP
.BI -I path
Insert
.I path
in front of the load path list.

.TP
.BI -A path
Append
.I path
to the load path list.

.TP
.BI -D feature
Add
.I feature
to the feature list,
useful for cond-expanding different library code.

.TP
.BI -m module
.TP
.BI -x module
Import
.I module
as if "(import \fImodule\fR)" were evaluated.
If the
.B -x
version is used, then
.I module
replaces the current environment instead of extending it.

.TP
.BI -l file
Load Scheme code from
.I file
searched for in the default load path.

.TP
.BI -e expr
Evaluate Scheme expression
.I expr\fR.

.TP
.BI -p expr
Evaluate Scheme expression
.I expr
and print the result to stdout.

.TP
.BI -t module.id
Enable tracing for the given identifier \fIid\fR in \fImodule\fR.

.TP
.BI -d image-file
Dump the current Scheme heap to
.I image-file
and exit.

This feature is experimental.

.TP
.BI -i image-file
Load the Scheme heap from
.I image-file
instead of compiling the init file on the fly.

This feature is experimental.

.SH ENVIRONMENT

.TP
.B CHIBI_MODULE_PATH
A colon-separated list of directories to search for module files,
inserted before the system default load paths.
.B chibi-scheme
searches for modules in directories in the following order:

.RS
.IP \(bu 4
directories specified with the \fB-I\fR path option
.RE
.RS
.IP \(bu 4
directories from CHIBI_MODULE_PATH
.RE
.RS
.IP \(bu 4
system default directories
.RE
.RS
.IP \(bu 4
directories specified with the \fB-A\fR path option
.RE

.RS
If CHIBI_MODULE_PATH is not set,
directories "./lib" and "." are searched before the system defaults
(in that order).

.SH AUTHORS
Alex Shinn

.SH REPORTING BUGS
Please report bugs
.UR https://github.com/ashinn/chibi-scheme
on Github
.UE .

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR chibi-doc (1)
.BR chibi-ffi (1)
.BR snow-chibi (1)
